doc/source/index.rst, before:

.. image:: images/tbmodels_logo.jpg
    :width: 250px
    :alt: TBmodels logo

|
|

.. title:: Overview

.. container:: section

    TBmodels is a Python package for evaluating tight-binding models. It features methods for reading and writing tight-binding models to various formats, and evaluating the Hamiltonian and eigenvalues of the system. It is considerably faster than comparable packages, enabling it to handle first-principles derived tight-binding models.

    .. rubric:: Please cite

    For the symmetrization feature:

    * Dominik Gresch, QuanSheng Wu, Georg W. Winkler, Rico Häuselmann, Matthias Troyer, and Alexey A. Soluyanov "Automated construction of symmetrized Wannier-like tight-binding models from ab initio calculations" [`PhysRevMaterials.2.103805 <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.2.103805>`_]


|

.. rubric:: Parts of the documentation

| :ref:`tutorial`
| start here
|
| :ref:`reference`
| detailed description of the classes and functions
|
| :ref:`whatsnew`
| description of the updates since later versions
|

.. rubric:: Getting in touch

The development version of TBmodels is hosted on `GitHub`_ .
Post an issue there or contact `me`__ directly with questions / suggestions
/ feedback about TBmodels.

__ dg_

.. rubric:: Indices and tables

| :ref:`genindex`
| list of all functions and classes
|
| :ref:`modindex`
| list of all modules and submodules

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 2
    :hidden:

    tutorial.rst
    reference.rst
    whatsnew.rst

.. _dg: http://github.com/greschd
.. _GitHub: http://github.com/Z2PackDev/TBmodels

Commit message:

Add short tutorial for symmetrization feature.

doc/source/index.rst, after:

.. image:: images/tbmodels_logo.jpg
    :width: 250px
    :alt: TBmodels logo

|
|

.. title:: Overview

.. container:: section

    TBmodels is a Python package for evaluating tight-binding models. It features methods for reading and writing tight-binding models to various formats, and evaluating the Hamiltonian and eigenvalues of the system. It is considerably faster than comparable packages, enabling it to handle first-principles derived tight-binding models.

    .. rubric:: Please cite

    For the symmetrization feature:

    * Dominik Gresch, QuanSheng Wu, Georg W. Winkler, Rico Häuselmann, Matthias Troyer, and Alexey A. Soluyanov "Automated construction of symmetrized Wannier-like tight-binding models from ab initio calculations" [`PhysRevMaterials.2.103805 <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.2.103805>`_]


|

.. rubric:: Parts of the documentation

| :ref:`tutorial`
| start here
|
| :ref:`symmetrize`
| tutorial for the symmetrization feature
|
| :ref:`reference`
| detailed description of the classes and functions
|
| :ref:`whatsnew`
| description of the updates since later versions
|

.. rubric:: Getting in touch

The development version of TBmodels is hosted on `GitHub`_ .
Post an issue there or contact `me`__ directly with questions / suggestions
/ feedback about TBmodels.

__ dg_

.. rubric:: Indices and tables

| :ref:`genindex`
| list of all functions and classes
|
| :ref:`modindex`
| list of all modules and submodules

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 2
    :hidden:

    tutorial.rst
    symmetrize.rst
    reference.rst
    whatsnew.rst

.. _dg: http://github.com/greschd
.. _GitHub: http://github.com/Z2PackDev/TBmodels
