doc/source/whatsnew.rst, before:

.. (c) 2015-2018, ETH Zurich, Institut fuer Theoretische Physik
.. Author: Dominik Gresch <greschd@gmx.ch>

.. _whatsnew:

What's new
==========

The following is a short summary of the most important changes in new releases of TBmodels, starting *after* version 1.1.

What's new in TBmodels 1.4 (development version)
------------------------------------------------

New features
''''''''''''

- Add ``--version`` option to the command-line interface, to print the current version.

- The ``KdotpModel`` has been promoted from an internal-only interface to the public ``tbmodels.kdotp`` submodule.

- The ``supercell`` method can be used to obtain a supercell tight-binding model.

- The ``hamilton`` and ``eigenval`` methods now also accept a list of k-points as input, returning a sequence of results in that case. This improves performance when evaluating many k-points.

- The ``shift_unit_cell`` method can be used to change the origin of the unit cell.

- Add ``remove_small_hop`` and ``remove_long_range_hop`` methods to cut hoppings with small value or long distance, respectively. Both these methods operate in-place on the existing model.

- The command-line interfaces creating tight-binding models support a ``--sparsity`` flag to change the sparsity of the output model (valid options are ``as_input``, ``dense``, and ``sparse``). Setting ``--sparsity=sparse`` can significantly reduce the memory needed to store a model.

Experimental features
'''''''''''''''''''''

- The ``fold_model`` method creates a tight-binding model for a smaller unit cell from a supercell model.

Deprecations and removals
'''''''''''''''''''''''''

- The ``from_hr`` and ``from_hr_file`` methods, deprecated since version 1.1, have been removed.


What's new in TBmodels 1.3
--------------------------

New features
''''''''''''

- **Constructing k.p models**: The :meth:`.construct_kdotp` method can be used to construct a k.p model from an existing tight-binding model.

- **Joining models**: The :meth:`.join_models` method can be used to combine models of the same structure with different orbitals.

Other improvements
''''''''''''''''''

- **Efficiency**: Empty hopping matrices are now automatically removed when constructing a new model. In some cases this can lead to significant performance improvements. No action is required to get these run-time benefits. To also reduce the size of existing models, they need to be loaded and saved.

Other changes
'''''''''''''

- **License**: TBmodels is now released under the more permissive Apache license.

What's new in TBmodels 1.2
--------------------------

New features
''''''''''''

- **Symmetrization feature**: The :meth:`.symmetrize` method allows symmetrizing tight-binding models by computing a group average, as described in `this paper <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.2.103805>`_.

- **Command-line interface**: A command-line interface for performing the most common tasks such as parsing models, symmetrizing, or evaluating bands was added.

- **Convenience function for Wannier90 parsing**: The :meth:`.from_wannier_folder` method was added to conveniently parse the output of a Wannier90 calculation, without having to specify each individual file.

Other changes
'''''''''''''

- **Update HDF5 file format**: The HDF5 file format was changed to be compatible with other tools in the Z2Pack ecosystem, such as ``symmetry-repesentation``. The old format is still supported, so no action is required.

Commit message:

Add a 'distance_ratio_threshold' for 'nearest_atom' parsing
When parsing with 'pos_kind="nearest_atom"', add a check that
computes the ratio of next-nearest / nearest atom. If it is below
the given threshold, an error is thrown. The purpose of this
check is to detect cases where it is inappropriate to use
'nearest_atom' parsing, because the Wannier centers have shifted
so much that they are no longer close to the original atoms,
and might be mis-identified.

doc/source/whatsnew.rst, after:

.. (c) 2015-2018, ETH Zurich, Institut fuer Theoretische Physik
.. Author: Dominik Gresch <greschd@gmx.ch>

.. _whatsnew:

What's new
==========

The following is a short summary of the most important changes in new releases of TBmodels, starting *after* version 1.1.

What's new in TBmodels 1.4 (development version)
------------------------------------------------

New features
''''''''''''

- Add ``--version`` option to the command-line interface, to print the current version.

- The ``KdotpModel`` has been promoted from an internal-only interface to the public ``tbmodels.kdotp`` submodule.

- The ``supercell`` method can be used to obtain a supercell tight-binding model.

- The ``hamilton`` and ``eigenval`` methods now also accept a list of k-points as input, returning a sequence of results in that case. This improves performance when evaluating many k-points.

- The ``shift_unit_cell`` method can be used to change the origin of the unit cell.

- Add ``remove_small_hop`` and ``remove_long_range_hop`` methods to cut hoppings with small value or long distance, respectively. Both these methods operate in-place on the existing model.

- The command-line interfaces creating tight-binding models support a ``--sparsity`` flag to change the sparsity of the output model (valid options are ``as_input``, ``dense``, and ``sparse``). Setting ``--sparsity=sparse`` can significantly reduce the memory needed to store a model.

- When using ``pos_kind='nearest_atom'``, the ``from_wannier_files`` method (and by extension the ``from_wannier_folder`` method and ``parse`` command) have an additional check: The ratio between next-nearest and nearest distance can be no lower than a given ``distance_ratio_threshold``. Note that this is a backwards-incompatible change, because the check might fail for cases where parsing succeeded before. However, we expect a failing check to indicate an underlying problem in most cases. To disable the check, set ``distance_ratio_threshold=1``.

Experimental features
'''''''''''''''''''''

- The ``fold_model`` method creates a tight-binding model for a smaller unit cell from a supercell model.

Deprecations and removals
'''''''''''''''''''''''''

- The ``from_hr`` and ``from_hr_file`` methods, deprecated since version 1.1, have been removed.


What's new in TBmodels 1.3
--------------------------

New features
''''''''''''

- **Constructing k.p models**: The :meth:`.construct_kdotp` method can be used to construct a k.p model from an existing tight-binding model.

- **Joining models**: The :meth:`.join_models` method can be used to combine models of the same structure with different orbitals.

Other improvements
''''''''''''''''''

- **Efficiency**: Empty hopping matrices are now automatically removed when constructing a new model. In some cases this can lead to significant performance improvements. No action is required to get these run-time benefits. To also reduce the size of existing models, they need to be loaded and saved.

Other changes
'''''''''''''

- **License**: TBmodels is now released under the more permissive Apache license.

What's new in TBmodels 1.2
--------------------------

New features
''''''''''''

- **Symmetrization feature**: The :meth:`.symmetrize` method allows symmetrizing tight-binding models by computing a group average, as described in `this paper <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.2.103805>`_.

- **Command-line interface**: A command-line interface for performing the most common tasks such as parsing models, symmetrizing, or evaluating bands was added.

- **Convenience function for Wannier90 parsing**: The :meth:`.from_wannier_folder` method was added to conveniently parse the output of a Wannier90 calculation, without having to specify each individual file.

Other changes
'''''''''''''

- **Update HDF5 file format**: The HDF5 file format was changed to be compatible with other tools in the Z2Pack ecosystem, such as ``symmetry-repesentation``. The old format is still supported, so no action is required.
